I love the immediacy of glass it's just
perfect for somebody that wants
immediate gratification
Josh Simpson has been a glass artist
since 1971 he uses white coffee to
create unique and beautiful objects at
his studio in the hills of Shelburne
Falls Massachusetts glassblowing started
probably 300 years bc when blow pipes
were invented by somebody in ancient
Egypt or Phoenicia and it's been blown
continuously for at least 2,300 years
since that time Josh makes vases and
plates but he has a special fondness for
the orbs he calls planets they come both
big and small small planets they're
really only about the size of marble but
but they have to they have wonderful
detail and then the night I'd love doing
those as much as I like making the
larger work one source of inspiration is
his wife NASA astronaut Cady Coleman
seen here with the long hair this video
was shot after she returned from the
shuttle Columbia's 1999 mission in which
she released the Chandra x-ray telescope
and there we have Chandra send-off this
is a moment that we've all worked so
hard for Katie took one of Josh's small
planets like this one with her on her
first space mission in 1995 today I'm
gonna make a piece type of work I've
been making since 1976 they're called
planets and actually I gonna make a mega
world large one today and it's a long
process of building up layer after layer
of glass from the inside to the outside
the finished planet won't be the earth
but a little world all its own this is
just the beginning to stir the embryo of
what we hope will be a very relatively
large piece it should be something
that's around 10
or or maybe even 11 inches in diameter
it'll probably weigh about 80 pounds
right now Holly what do you think Greg
four pounds adding hot glass can be
tricky
Josh compares it to taking dripping
honey across the room to a piece of
toast now he's using a block of wood
Applewood to shape the glass the wood
starts to burn even though it's been
underwater for months and this totally
waterlogged it will start to char after
a while the core is made of several
layers of clear glass once that set josh
adds metallic silver this class or this
surface would be the surface of a planet
upon which I'm going to put rivers and
oceans and continents and cities and all
types of things that are like this blank
continent and this will become the ocean
and now the detail work can begin
Josh rolls on crushed glass to make
continents maybe what must warm
continents perhaps teeming with life
they don't look like much now but just
wait heats the globe begins then he adds
tiny canes bundles of colored glass you
have to make sure all those little canes
are in exactly the right place and are
pushed down so they they're not sticking
up in any weird way
and now I'm going to take gold in the
form of gold leaf and melt it on the
surface of the planet now Josh uses a
hydrogen torch to melt
dichroic glass onto the surface if the
flame touches the planet it can ruin the
color
a dental drill fine-tunes the design
crush dichroic glass creates swirls in
the ocean it's those details that make
the piece fascinating to look at and you
can see the blue of the ocean and you
can see where these little tiny bits of
silver that I put on have become little
ocean storms swirling like hurricanes
and you can see ocean currents going on
all of that is is just how we prepare it
how we fix the surface before we get to
this point more layers of glass go on
and the planet is so heavy now that it
takes three people to turn the blow pipe
during shaping josh adds tiny beads of
glass that he calls spaceships in
between the layers
a final steaming hot layer of glass is
added then heat is applied to the bottom
of the globe to make it thinner so it
can be removed from the blowpipe
probably 45 or 100 or 5,000 degrees
temperature and that's enough to warm
just the bottom of this planet
okay we're about ready to take it off I
need Emmy Emmy would you heat my gloves
please okay break it off yes good break
now I don't want to hold on to this for
very long because it's 1,300 degrees
okay
so that's how we make a make a world
that that that piece was just about 1300
degrees it's heavy and now needs to sit
in this annealing oven for about a month
30 days and cool down from that 1,300
degrees all the way down to room
temperature that's it
Josh and Joyce both his work and his
Western Massachusetts location I think
what I love about this place is the fact
that they're just amazing views down the
valley and and at night they're
incredible views of the heavens in the
sky and I'm up here on a hilltop and so
I can see 80 miles in one direction out
my kitchen window and 45 miles down the
valley in the other it's a great place